One of the things I always noticed in a department
when I was running it, anytime you're talking
about changes and suggestions from faculty, they
pretend they're coming up with a big original idea
about how to do graduate program or how to do this,
how to do that. But when you investigate it in
detail, you'll find that what they're proposing
to do is exactly the same way they did it where they
came from. And so I think anytime you get these
outsiders coming in, you tend to, you do get some of
that mixture, but I'm not sure it's always that
great. Sometimes what we had was better than what
they're trying to propose. I'll tell you one other
thing that I've noticed that I think A&M ought to
improve on. That is the way they treat their former
presidents and so on. Now,
when I came here, Walton had been president, and I
think he was the one that got us that permanent
fund, wasn't he? Well, we began to get a better
share. I meant that was when he got, he was the one
that looked up the law and got all that going. And he
was running the post office or something. Then
when Gilchrist stepped down, Fred Benson finally
gave him an office over there in Zachary. Then when
Benson finally stepped down, old Flipsy wouldn't
even give him an office anywhere for a long time.
And I just think that they lose a lot by not having
these people more involved in. Now, I went to this
little junior college, this little Baptist
junior college, and we had, I think we had chapel
every morning. And the guy that I took college
algebra and trigonometry was born in about
mid-1800s. Dr. R.L. Moore. Big, tall, skinny guy,
wore a frock-tail coat and wing-tip collars with a
string tie. And he didn't have any problem with
what was right and wrong. But he was very revered.
He sat up on the stage every day, and the president
always deferred to him. And he was still teaching a
course in college algebra and trigonometry, and
he taught one in Greek. That was his, but he wanted
to get associated with the average student. Not
just the preachers. And every morning, I'll tell
you this one, you might enjoy it. Every morning in
class, he would tell us a little moral story. And it
was also back in those depression days of
encouraging students. Now, I don't know whether
we do enough of that. Motivating them, just
telling them, you've got to make something of
yourself. And he mentioned that Dick Wayne, that
Hall that used to be in mathematics, was in one of
his classes. And he really worked hard. And he went
on to be professor at one of the greater
universities, is what he said. But he was, of
course, against smoking and everything. He was so
against smoking that what he did, they said at one
time, was buy up all of the tobacco in the little
town there, take it out on the middle of the campus,
and burn it. But anyhow, in those years, and that
was about 1939, the number one hit parade song was,
I don't want to set the world on fire, I just want to
start a flame in your heart. And old Dr. Moore came
in one morning, and he said, and he always called us
young people. He said, young people, I just don't
know what this world's coming to. He said, I was
coming to walk, walking to work this morning, and I
passed this young man. He was pushing this
wheelbarrow, and he was singing, I don't want to
set the world on fire. And young people, he was. He
wasn't. He wasn't. So, but I, now there is an
example. We're not getting, I think there's a
tendency in all organizations to let us just bury
the guy once we get through with him. Instead of, if
he was good enough to serve and run your
organization, he would really be good enough to
have around to help you. And we need to, that's one
of the things that we need to take advantage of. I
propose to. I propose to President Bowen, and I
couldn't think of a better title than alumni
professor. And I said, every year when the various
faculty members retire, why not then try to look
and say, which of these would we like to be able to
still claim were part of our team, still use their
talents and abilities, and ask the products of
that department or that unit, would you help us?
And I said, why not raise the money to give this
person a small little honorarium so that this
person could still teach a course or do a little
research. We could call on for advice. Randy
Mattson, then executive director of the former
students, he said, I could raise that money with a
few phone calls. But Dr. Bowen didn't see that as a
good idea. I wonder how he will feel when he
retires. Because see, just look what's happened
to them. Mm-hmm. They're just walking around.
Nobody. Yep. Yep. And Fred, old Flipsy, wouldn't
even, and then Flipsy would just browbeat the hell
out of you. I'll give you one story that got him off
of my back. I was up there meeting with him and Skip
Fletcher. Boy, they just beat me all over the place
about this and that, getting more money for this
and more money for that, and a lot of things. And so I
just kind of let it slide off. When I got back to the
office, I decided the way I'll fix him is I'm going
to write him a letter. And I'm going to tell him, you
told me several things this morning in our
discussion. And before I tell my faculty what you
said, I want to make sure that I got the details
correct. Then I listed them. I didn't hear
anything from old Flipsy. And then I throw him in.
He says, Charlie. Charlie, we're going to make
peace between your house and my house. And he never
did jump me anymore. Now, he succeeded Dean
Benson? Well, no. He was assistant to Richardson.
Oh, oh, oh. And he and I got along fine after that,
but he didn't try to come after me anymore. He would
intimidate people if he knew that he could. You
know, there's some people who run over others if
they realize they can. Yes. And so that really
cooled his heels. And from then on, even
Richardson would get him to go talk to me rather
than do it himself after I told him that if they
wanted the job, they could have it. But Richardson
helped me a lot. We worked together. But I just, you
know, stood my ground on that. I didn't see any use
of my stepping down at that particular time.
Trace, for this recording, after Fred Benson
served as dean, who were the other deans? Let's
see. Page was the next dean that was selected.
Describe him. Well, he was a very nice individual.
Where'd he come from?
Let's see. I can't remember. It was a northern
university. He was in kind of an impossible
situation. Skip Fletcher had the tease. If you
have one man in charge of the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station, the other in charge of the
academic, it'll never work because I started out
working under that one. And Barlow and Mello had
it. And they didn't even talk to one another. They
sent letters up and down the hall on that new
engineering building. And each one of them
expects you to work full-time for them, is what the
problem is. And so Page had it all against him to
begin with, but he didn't really have any guts. And
he wouldn't go after, I don't think he went after
money like he should have for us. Because I... Our
operating budgets were so small that I used most
all my gift and grant funds to do things that I
should have been spending state money on. All
travel. I paid for it with gift and grant. Go give
papers. I paid for that with gift and grant money.
And I couldn't get him to... He wouldn't stand up
for you over there. And so that was... I think he's a
nice... He's a nice individual, pleasant. But he
just didn't have the grit to stand up to somebody to
tell them, you know, we need this. Who was next
after him?
I guess they had several interims in there.
McDonald was an interim for a while. And I guess
that was about the next one. And I guess the next one
was Richardson. Describe him, where he came from.
He came from MIT. And I think he's... He's a real
good manager. He doesn't like any confrontation
at all. He can hardly... But he's really good at
one-to-one discussions.
But he didn't like to have anybody criticize...
You know, a lot of times things really ought to be
debated even if people get a little hot to find out
what the real facts are. Get them out and open. And
he didn't like this. He didn't like... He's just an
individual. He seems to be kind of timid. He's not a
good speaker. He did all right running. I think he
did a good job, except he was just a little timid on
some of those things. And he had Flipsy doing all of
the nasty work. He had him doing it for him. But I
think he was good, and he was also good when he got
into the higher position. But he was not a good
public representation of Texas A&M University.
You need a man. You need a man that can get up there
and speak. And he couldn't do it. Describe to
someone who might not be aware of the realities of
the College of Engineering, Texas Engineering
Experiment Station, and the Texas Engineering
Extension Service. Explain how those are related
and describe their functions. All right. The
Texas A&M... The College of Engineering is a part
of Texas A&M University. The Texas Engineering
Experiment Station is a separate state agency on a
chart. It would occupy a position parallel to
Texas A&M University. And also, as I recall, Texas
Extension Service is the same way. And I'm not sure
whether TTI is. It may be... And where do they
report? They report... They report now to the...
Well, they've had them report, and they've had
them report to different ones. They report now to
the Dean of Engineering, because the dean is in
charge of all of it. One time, they reported to
different people, and there's where all the
problems, because the poor little old faculty
member, he has to work for both of them, all three of
them. And so all the problems come down, and he's
the stretch. And you, as a department head, needed
to be able... I had to work with all of them. Yeah.
And you... You might want to get funding from all of
them. I'll tell you one other thing that I think
that universities don't work nearly hard enough
at. In fact, sometimes they go the wrong ways.
Well, there are two things. One of them, just
remind me if I don't come back to it, is the
coursework, and another one is on funding people.
The one on funding. All the time I was head of the
department, I was able to keep everybody on a
12-month basis, regardless of whether they had
research or not. And we did that by using gift and
grant funds, and I just juggled it to where we made
it work, because it's very difficult to live on a
nine-month salary. And so I felt like everybody
that's around the university ought to be
full-time employed. And I think that one of the
things that stirs up more resentment on a
university campus is having professors on a
nine-month basis, and administrators whom they
are not really over-enthusiastic
about to begin with, any administrator, on a
12-month basis. And here these people are trying
to get by on a nine-month basis. And I think that
what we ought to do is we've got a big plant,
millions of dollars invested in the facilities
here. We ought to expand the summer program to
where we've got 12-month employment throughout
the year. We're not an agricultural society.
anymore that was the reason that was originally
set up we ought to get around to the fact that we are a
12-month operation and that we need full-time
employees and and i think you'd get a lot more
loyalty among employees if you had because these
that can't get it and it's very difficult in some
areas to get research during the summer and this
shouldn't be the way we operate and we should try to
do it on a 12-month basis and have people doing
something there ought to be a and i think there's a
lot of students that want to take courses more
course in the summer can't get them because the
money's not allocated for summer courses they're
trying to seem to be trying to keep those down but
they ought to be going the other way just try to get
more more summer courses jumping way back now as in
those 23 years that you were department head
looking back who were some of the key faculty
members that you brought in i brought nearly the
whole bunch i know but who were the ones that made
the most i'm not going to ask you the negative just
the positive actually most of them did all right
who were the ones that were the cream of the crop
well uh eubank was a good one would describe each
one of them as you're going along okay well eubank
came to us from rose poly as an undergraduate and
went to uh i've forgotten where he didn't go for his
graduate work he was in thermodynamics and he
helped the get the thermodynamics program
started and he did uh he was a good methodical
teacher he did teaching as well as research and
he's still involved and then another one that i
brought in was ron darby and he may not be he wasn't
as successful in getting research he was uh
probably more negative on putting in for it
saying he wouldn't get it or something like that uh
but he is real real good individual and uh so that
was another one dick davidson was another real
good one that we brought in and he was had been good
uh throughout his whole career he's excellent
teacher and original ideas and and good at uh
generally across the board um
let's see um ray anthony was another one i brought
him in as you were recruiting these people how did
you identify the high quality faculty members the
potential faculty members how did you find them oh
uh well we'd uh some of these we checked with the
found out who was coming out of rice there i knew the
profs down there and the good ones and i got some
from them and uh ray we'd had as a graduate student
went over texas got his phd so we knew him we also
hired hall in later and although he's been through
a lot of the things i don't think he measures up to
these other people but uh he was he's a really
go-getter as far as hunting funds but he doesn't
have the staying power that i'd say some of the
others did as far as time after time um
see i guess that those are the old standbys that are
over there what were some some kind of big step big
achievement research projects that the
department did during your years of leadership
well i think that they did made numerous
contributions in in thermodynamics they had a
thermometer thermodynamics group that got
together and they all had several grants going
there
and that carried on for a good long while to where
it's gotten now very difficult to get that type of
money they want to put money on something that's
going to be turn the world around you know but this
was collecting good solid thermodynamic data
that they there was quite a bit, we made a lot of
progress in catalysis and kinetics. Ray Anthony
and others worked on that. And Ron did some work on
rheology. And I did a lot of work on distillation.
In fact, I've got two papers. I'm trying to get out
of the field, but I've got two papers right now that
are going to be published. And one of them is going
into a journal where one of the editors are
retiring and they ask me to write a paper. And I did,
and I used a concept I've been using in teaching a
class. And I wrote it up, and sure enough, it's
accepted. It really wasn't any experimental
research. It was just a concept. It was ability,
technique for representation of indimensional
space in not just three, four, five, in
two-dimensional space and represent all the
complexities there in two dimensions. And it's
real simple. It's very similar to just
representing it for two components. And then
another one that I've got coming out, I didn't
really think about getting a paper. A guy from
Vladivostok, a Russian, wrote me on email that
he'd like me to send him some of the papers that we
had. And instead of doing that, what I did was just
sit down. I said, well, that poor guy doesn't have
any money, can't even buy the papers and so on. What
I'll do is just sit down. I'm going to derive him
some equations and give him ones that we haven't
ever published before. And so I did, and he's ended
up, he took those and made the problem a little
bigger. And he's got a paper written now. I'm going
to be a publisher with him. From Vladivostok. It's
on the eastern front over there of Russia. Who
were the big, were there any key industry
supporters for chemical engineering? Research
here during your years? Oh yeah, we had Dow
continue to support us some. And there weren't no
real big ones, but enough grants. Dow, I've got
$20,000 a year to help me do this numerical stuff
and theoretical developments, which was a good,
back in those days, that's a good little sum of
money just to have coming in every year. So we had
some money like that. We had a lot. I also had some
from National. Science Foundation. We got quite a
bit that way, and other organizations. Also Amoco
helped quite a bit with our labs and so forth. So we
managed one way or another to get grants from one
another and the government and all these people to
try to keep enough coming in to keep the research
program going and pay the graduate students as
well. Under your leadership, which do you think
was more important? The theoretical or the
practical? I don't
know that there was all that much that really can't
be divided that well down the line because there's
a lot of theoretical concepts involved in a lot of
them that can be practical problems. And I don't
know that I'd want to make a judgment on that. Of
these key faculty, in your years of leadership,
did we lose some? Did we lose some key faculty
members to industry or another institution that?
No, we really didn't lose many people. The
only one, we lost one or two, but we weren't
concerned about it because
we weren't sure we wanted them anyway. And so they
got hired somewhere else. We brought a whole group
of young ones. Watson is another one that's done
real well over there I didn't mention. But. But.
But. But. But. But. But. But. But. to make sure they
got started in research how did you get how did you
do that well we met with them find out what they were
doing and giving them advice and also putting a
little pressure on them you want to try to get write
this proposal or that one and uh so uh i think they
thought we might have been a little hard on them but
uh there's the time to do something is when you
first get them and so they made it and i got a watson
actually i told richardson this and he was amazed
that i did it uh watson came up for tenure and the
full professors looked at him and decided they
didn't want to give him tenure and so they reported
me and i said well i'm not really sure whether they
know this man well enough i'm going to see what so i
appointed another committee made up of the
associate professors of his his precise peers to
make a judgment on him what they thought about him
and they came up positive and so i decided i'd go
ahead and recommend him for tenure and no richard
says you mean you went against your full
professors i said well i sure did because i thought
he deserved it i don't know whether i guess it could
be debatable yet but he's doing real well now as an
outsider we heard a way over in history i heard that
it was common practice in engineering in those
years that a new faculty member got a little bit of
funding through the experiment station or some
research account to start with yeah we did some of
that and i gave them some department money and that
they were told that by the time three four five
years in the future they were expected to be
getting their own research well we we tried to get
them as soon as possible to start looking for it
okay because it takes two or three years after you
even start so we had them start looking for it in
some area that they were familiar with and then we
gave them enough to try to give them enough to get
started trying to do something are there some
individual honors that came to the department
during your years of leadership that you'd like to
well i don't remember all of them we got nearly
every one of them as these distinguished awards
nearly everybody in the department got teaching
or research what about what about national or
international awards yeah there are several of
those as the years went on with what other schools
by the time you retired as department head what
other schools should we be compared with in
chemical engineering oh i i think that uh uh
university of texas rice all of these are strong
schools were we there were we in there well we uh i
don't know that we're university of texas always
had a little more support than we ever had boy i'll
tell you we had so little support in the 50s i
remember norman road asked they were building
everything up at uh what was the name of this school
that went over to the university system arlington
they were building all kind of engineering
buildings up there and we still had those old
buildings over there where electrical was you
know back i was in the navy unit with norman road and
and kenny hancock and some of them and fred benson
and schiller and norman told us he says you know i i
was talking to uh uh let's see i guess it was mr
gilchrist i was talking mr grillchrist yesterday
i said mr gilchrist you know how norman was he's
very outspoken you remember him don't you norman
road are we getting ready to move the college
engineering up to arlington he's a mr gilchrist no
why he said well you're putting all the money in
buildings up there to the down here but those were
really lean years i'll tell you they really were
all right by comparison what were the early 80s
like well uh where the change was was when we got
zachary and that was about 73 or somewhere along
there and that then we really were beginning to be
able to compete actually when we had those old
facilities i didn't even like to take uh former
graduate i mean potential graduate students
through a lab because it was so ratty in fact when i
had old charlie over here jones that was president
of exxon and jim galloway i didn't realize they
were as bad as they were and i took them through and
we sat back down up there into my office and and old
charlie jones says chuck claire you need some you
need some more facilities so an outsider could see
it and we didn't have we got we were on the list and
that used to worry doc all the time getting a new
building and i decided that's one thing i'm not
going to worry about it's more important what you
do regardless what the dang building looks like
than having the building because it's really the
states anyway but we were we were always first on
the list and then come along petroleum would get
one in fact they got two before we ever got one and uh
but finally we got in the loop and and got some
facilities but we really didn't have that kind of
support for a long time by the way we got behind and
also not having girls over here it was hard to draw
graduate students and all those formative years
and so it wasn't an easy battle as the years went on
in the late 70s and 80s did we begin to be
competitive in salaries yeah we're we're closer
to being competitive now i think we probably are
now no after they started kicking them up we became
we were started being competitive with salaries i
don't know exactly how they are some of these
people watch them and plot them all the time i don't
but i think our salary is pretty good right now for
you as a department head who also was a real world
faculty member what were the greatest joys of all
these years well i guess actually it still is is
really getting up and teaching in class
interaction with students and and a lot of things
i'm teaching the courses i'm taught is i develop
the books that i'm teaching out of and develop the
theory that i'm teaching so it's just real
pleasure to get up there and be able to explain
things to students i did i taught a class this
morning eight o'clock please share if you can any
examples of aggie good bull tricks pranks that you
may have been aware of surely students must have
tried to pull something on a chemical engineering
faculty member somewhere along the line oh well i
can tell you a couple that happened to faculty
members one of them i had this graduate student
nathan welch who was i think he was hyperactive and
he you'd see him walking up and down the hall he was
sharp as a tag and he'd have a coke in one hand the
cigarette in the other and a pencil over his ear and
just walking as fast as he could and so one day i had
to go out of town and i asked him to teach my class and
i said now i want you to really give them a good
presentation and he said well i'll give them so
when i got back what had happened was the students
told me that old nate got in there and he was just
going like a house on fire he was taking a swig of
that coke and then he'd smoke the cigarette and
then he'd put the pencil up on his ear and then he'd
smoke a cigarette again finally he laid the
cigarette up on his ear and he says don't you all
tell dr holland this will be my last lecture
and then old dr lindsay i remember one time he was
always huffing and puffing around you know we're
teaching i was teaching a course over in the new
engineering building we used we're getting ready
he liked to go on inspection trips we were getting
ready to go on an inspection trip and so doc was
preparing them and he came over and he came
blustering in there and he told him about the trip